Cumulative delta divergence - ForexBee Skip to content Get a massive 30% discount on all courses and indicators. Use Code: SAVE30 Menu Home Blog Learn Price Action Hot Price Patterns Forex Chart Patterns Candlestick Patterns Harmonic Patterns The Strat Forex Indicators Trading Forex Trading For Beginners Price Action Analysis Weekly How to forex? Pine Script Tutorial Supply &#038; Demand indicator Courses Calculators Backtesting Software New Forex Lotsize Calculator Forex Compounding Calculator VWAP Calculator Candlestick body to wick ratio calculator Candlestick Range Calculator Synthetic Indices Calculator Gann Square of 9 Calculator Bid Ask Spread Calculator Portal Manage Billing Home &gt; Blog &gt; Forex Indicators Trading &gt; Cumulative delta divergence Cumulative delta divergence Published by Ali Muhammad Updated on September 23, 2024 Follow us on Google News Definition Cumulative delta divergence is the deviation between the cumulative volume delta chart and the candlestick chart of the same financial asset. The cumulative volume delta shows divergence, and traders use this signal to forecast significant trend reversals in the market. CVD also denotes it in trading. In this article, I will explain the cumulative delta divergence, but before this, I will also give an overview of the origin of volume delta and cumulative volume delta. Then it will be easy for you to understand the cumulative delta divergence. What is the volume delta in trading? Volume delta is the difference between the buying volume and selling volume of a particular financial asset within a specific time interval. Volume delta is derived from order flow trading in which traders track the activity of buyers and sellers in the market. Volume Delta = Buying volume – Selling volume Here Buying volume refers to the total number of buy orders institutional traders place in specific intervals. Selling volume refers to the total number of sell orders placed by market makers in a specific timeframe. How does the volume delta display on the chart? The volume delta indicator uses the buy or sell volume to show the trader&#8217;s activity on the chart in red and green bars. This indicator acts as an oscillator that oscillates around the zero line. If the bar is above zero, buying pressure is more than selling. And there are many buy orders in the market. Buyers want to offer a high price. Its color will be green. While if the bar is below the zero line, it means the selling pressure is more than the buying pressure. There are several sell orders in the market compared to buy orders. Its color will be red. What is cumulative volume delta? It is the overall representation of the volume delta on the chart. In the simple volume delta, you’ll see every bar&#8217;s results. But the cumulative volume delta also takes the data of previous bars to make an overall average volume delta. It is called cumulative volume delta. It is better than the simple volume delta because you can check the overall result of each price wave of the candlestick chart. However, it also depends on the trader’s requirements. But we will use the cumulative volume delta indicator to check the divergence. How to use the cumulative volume delta indicator? Unlike the volume delta, the cumulative volume delta is applied to the price waves for technical analysis. We use swing highs and swing lows to determine the strength of buyers and sellers. Kindly learn in detail about the swing high and low from this article . The cumulative volume delta indicator should align with the price action waves. If they don’t align, then it means there’s an imbalance hidden behind the candlestick chart. For example, if the price is higher, the CVD should also make higher highs. While if the price is making lower lows, then the CVD indicator should also make lower lows. If there’s a divergence between the price and indicator, the asset&#8217;s value is imbalanced. Let me explain the cumulative delta divergence to get buy or sell signals. What is Cumulative Delta Divergence? It is the divergence of both CVD indicators and price. For example, if the price is making higher highs, then the indicator can diverge to a higher low. This will act as divergence. There are four types of cumulative delta divergence. Bullish divergence Bearish divergence Hidden bullish divergence Hidden bearish divergence Bullish cumulative delta divergence In this type of divergence, the price will make a lower low but the CVD indicator will show a higher low. It means that the price is diverging from the indicator. It is a bullish signal, and the price will make a bullish trend . Bearish cumulative delta divergence The price will be higher in this type of divergence, but the CVD indicator will make a lower high, indicating a bearish trend reversal. It is a bearish signal, and we will open a sell trade on this confirmation. Hidden bullish cumulative delta divergence This is opposite to the previous type of divergence, but it also gives a bullish signal. The price will make a higher low in this type, but the CVD indicator will make a lower low indicating a bullish trend. Hidden bearish cumulative delta divergence In this type of divergence, the price will make a lower high, but the indicator will make a higher high. This forecasts a bearish trend in the market. How to trade with the cumulative volume delta indicator using divergences? The divergence trading strategy is highly effective with the CVD indicator. However, it works in stocks and other related financial assets. It will not work in forex or indices because forex is a decentralized system and does not provide accurate data on the volume. In the divergence trading strategy, I recommend using the candlestick patterns as a confluence with the divergence. Because cumulative delta divergence also shows the trend reversal signal, candlestick patterns also forecast trend reversal. The forecast of both technical tools is the same, so if we combine both, the probability of winning will increase. For example, to open a buy order, you should always confirm the bullish divergence signal with the help of bullish candlestick patterns. In the same way, for sell signals, you should confirm with the help of bearish candlestick patterns. The BEST Cumulative Volume Delta Divergence Strategy! | You Won&#039;t Believe What Happens Next! Watch this video on YouTube Conclusion Cumulative delta divergence is an excellent trading method, and we can increase the winning probability of this method by adding a confluence of candlestick patterns. I highly recommend the cumulative delta indicator if you&#8217;re a stock trader. Show your love! Understanding Price Rejection in trading September 23, 2024 Range Trading Explained September 23, 2024 Do you want to get success in Trading? Here's the Roadmap: 1. Learn supply and demand from the cheat sheet here 2. Get access the Supply &amp; Demand Indicator here 3. Understand the fair value gap here 4. Use the set and forget strategy here 5 . Follow the risk management plan here Related Posts Reversal Finder Indicator Trend Duration Forecast Indicator by ChartPrime What is Scalping PullBack Tool R1? SuperTrend Indicator MACD + SMA 200 Strategy Trendlines Breakout Indicator Trading Strategy Top 5 Smart Money Indicators in Forex Trading Leave a Comment Comment Name Email Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. &#916; Education Hub Candlestick Patterns Hikkake Candlestick Pattern Explained Dark Cover Cloud Candlestick Pattern Three Outside Up Candlestick Pattern T Shaped Candlestick Pattern Takuri Candlestick Pattern Thrusting Line Candlestick Pattern Ladder Top Candlestick Pattern Exhaustion Candlestick Patterns Explained Bearish Continuation Candlestick Patterns Three bar play Candlestick Pattern Bullish Harami Candlestick Pattern Bearish Harami Candlestick Pattern Bullish Inverted Hammer Candlestick Pattern Bullish Hammer Candlestick Pattern Shooting Star Candlestick Pattern Double Doji Candlestick Pattern 4 Best Bearish Candlestick Patterns 4 Best Bullish Candlestick Patterns 37 Candlestick Patterns Cheat Sheet Tower Bottom Candlestick Pattern Matching Low Candlestick Pattern Matching High Candlestick Pattern Advance Block Candlestick Pattern Bullish mat hold Candlestick Pattern Bullish Kicker Candlestick Pattern Bearish Breakaway Candlestick Pattern Reversal Candlestick Patterns Explained Downside Tasuki Gap Candlestick Pattern Separating Lines Candlestick Pattern Upside Tasuki Gap Candlestick Pattern On Neck Candlestick Pattern: Complete Trading Guide Bearish Kicking Candlestick Pattern Deliberation Candlestick Pattern Three Stars in the South Candlestick Pattern High Wave Candlestick Pattern: Definition & Trading Strategy Three Black Crows Candlestick Three White Soldiers Candlestick Pattern Bearish Piercing Candlestick Pattern Bearish Abandoned Baby Candlestick Bullish Abandoned Baby Candlestick Pattern Falling Three Method Candlestick Pattern Rising Three Methods Candlestick Evening Doji Star Candlestick Pattern Dragonfly Doji Trading Guide with 2 Confluences 4H Trading Strategy using EMAs & Candlestick Patterns Tweezer Bottom Candlestick Pattern tweezer top candlestick pattern Falling Window Candlestick Pattern Rising Window Candlestick Pattern Bearish Belt Hold Candlestick Pattern Bullish Piercing Candlestick Pattern Bullish belt hold Candlestick Pattern Three Outside Down Bearish Candlestick Pattern Long legged Doji Candlestick Pattern Morning Doji Star Candlestick Pattern Understanding Inside Bar Pattern What is Engulfing Pattern? Pin bar Candlestick Pattern Explained Forex Chart Patterns How to identify XABCD Pattern Correctly? Trading Chart Patterns PDF [FREE Download] 29 Chart Patterns Cheat Sheet How to identify the Adam and Eve Pattern? Dragon Pattern in Trading: With Complete Strategy Hikkake Candlestick Pattern Explained Dark Cover Cloud Candlestick Pattern Three Outside Up Candlestick Pattern T Shaped Candlestick Pattern Takuri Candlestick Pattern Thrusting Line Candlestick Pattern Ladder Top Candlestick Pattern Exhaustion Candlestick Patterns Explained Dead Cat Bounce Pattern Explained Bearish and Bullish Megaphone pattern Bearish Continuation Patterns Bullish Continuation Patterns Overview Bearish Continuation Candlestick Patterns Three bar play Candlestick Pattern Bullish Harami Candlestick Pattern Bearish Harami Candlestick Pattern Bullish Rectangle Pattern Bullish Inverted Hammer Candlestick Pattern Bullish Hammer Candlestick Pattern Shooting Star Candlestick Pattern 19 Chart Patterns Explained Double Doji Candlestick Pattern Bump and Run Pattern Ascending Broadening Wedge Descending Broadening Wedge Definition & Trading Strategy Wolfe Wave Trading Rules 4 Best Bearish Candlestick Patterns 4 Best Bullish Candlestick Patterns 37 Candlestick Patterns Cheat Sheet Tower Bottom Candlestick Pattern Matching Low Candlestick Pattern Matching High Candlestick Pattern Advance Block Candlestick Pattern Bullish mat hold Candlestick Pattern Bullish Kicker Candlestick Pattern Bearish Breakaway Candlestick Pattern Reversal Candlestick Patterns Explained Downside Tasuki Gap Candlestick Pattern Separating Lines Candlestick Pattern Upside Tasuki Gap Candlestick Pattern On Neck Candlestick Pattern: Complete Trading Guide Bearish Kicking Candlestick Pattern Deliberation Candlestick Pattern Three Stars in the South Candlestick Pattern High Wave Candlestick Pattern: Definition & Trading Strategy Three Black Crows Candlestick Three White Soldiers Candlestick Pattern Bearish Piercing Candlestick Pattern Bearish Abandoned Baby Candlestick Bullish Abandoned Baby Candlestick Pattern Falling Three Method Candlestick Pattern Rising Three Methods Candlestick Evening Doji Star Candlestick Pattern Dragonfly Doji Trading Guide with 2 Confluences 4H Trading Strategy using EMAs & Candlestick Patterns Tweezer Bottom Candlestick Pattern tweezer top candlestick pattern Falling Window Candlestick Pattern Rising Window Candlestick Pattern Bearish Belt Hold Candlestick Pattern Bullish Piercing Candlestick Pattern Bullish belt hold Candlestick Pattern Three Outside Down Bearish Candlestick Pattern Long legged Doji Candlestick Pattern Morning Doji Star Candlestick Pattern How to trade Ascending Channel? Descending Channel Pattern TREND CHANNELS Explained Ascending Triangle Pattern Symmetrical Triangle Pattern Bearish Flag Pattern Explained Rounding Bottom Pattern Bull Flag Pattern Harmonic Patterns Cheat Sheet Double Bottom Pattern Double Top Pattern Triple Top Pattern AB=CD Pattern Crab & Deep Crab Pattern Harmonic Gartley Pattern Harmonic Shark Pattern How to trade 5-0 Harmonic Pattern? What is Descending Triangle Pattern? Understanding Inside Bar Pattern Introduction to Three Inside Up and Three Inside Down Pattern What is Triple Bottom pattern | Trading Strategy Explained A Unique Strategy to Trade Diamond Pattern Gravestone Doji Candlestick Trading Strategy Explained Rising or Falling Wedge Pattern in Forex Trading Marubozu candlestick Pattern Butterfly Pattern Forex Cup and Handle Pattern in Forex Trading Pennant Pattern in Forex Trading Three Drives Pattern Cypher Pattern What is Engulfing Pattern? Forex Reversal Patterns Head and Shoulders Pattern Hidden Inside Bar Pattern Harmonic Bat Pattern and SnD How to trade Trend line Breakout Wolfe Wave Pattern Pin bar Candlestick Pattern Explained Forex Indicators Trading Reversal Finder Indicator Trend Duration Forecast Indicator by ChartPrime What is Scalping PullBack Tool R1? SuperTrend Indicator MACD + SMA 200 Strategy Trendlines Breakout Indicator Trading Strategy Top 5 Smart Money Indicators in Forex Trading Top 7 Price Action Indicators in Trading Order Block indicator by ICT How to trade with MACD divergence indicator? How to spot trends using Keltner Channel Indicator? Higher High and Lower Low Indicator Squeeze Momentum Indicator (SMI) Accumulative swing index indicator (ASI) STARC Bands Indicator Shinohara intensity ratio indicator (SIR) Schaff trend cycle indicator (STC) Random Walk Index Indicator (RWI) Half Trend indicator Top 5 Reversal indicators for Trend Reversal Traders How to use the Take Profit Indicator MACD 4C Indicator Best Support and Resistance Indicator Cumulative delta divergence Choppiness Index Indicator Explained How to use Trade Entry Indicator? Chaikin Money Flow Indicator Rainbow Indicator Pivot point indicator Center Of Gravity Indicator ATR Trailing Stop Indicator Bid Volume Indicator Explained QQE indicator explained Inside Bar Indicator working principles How to trade with RSI Candle Indicator Chart Pattern Indicator Elliott Wave Indicator explained How to trade with RSI divergence indicator? How to use the Balance of Power Indicator? Volume Underlay Indicator explained Williams R indicator: Definition, Formula & Trading Strategy How to trade with ZigZag indicator? Aroon Oscillator Explained Awesome Oscillator: Formula, Strategy & Calculations How to use the Vortex Indicator Elder Force Index: Indicator, Formula, Strategy Ehler Fisher Transform Guide, Trading Strategy, Settings, Formula CCI Indicator Guide, Calculations, Settings & Trading Strategy Order Flow Forex Gator Oscillator: Definition, Uses, Four phases and Strategy ATR Bands: Definition, Formula, Uses, and Strategy Best Indicator for Gold Trading (XAUUSD) Supertrend Trading Strategy Guide Top 5 Indicators for Day Trading Set and Forget Indicator Supply and Demand Indicator Trading Strategy Explained Breakout Indicator RSI Divergence Indicator Volume Profile Indicator Engulfing Candle Indicator Key Level Indicator Wolfe Wave Indicator Overbought Oversold Indicator Order Block Indicator Absolute Price Oscillator (APO) Indicator McClellan Oscillator Bollinger Bands Cheat Sheet What is KDJ Indicator? Best Bollinger Bands Settings For Trading Ichimoku cloud Cheat Sheet SMI Ergodic Indicator Explained Understanding How Relative Volatility Index Works Divergence Cheat Sheet How to Identify Hidden Bullish Divergence Correctly? How to trade with VWAP indicator in Forex What is Gann Square of 9 in Trading Gann Fan in Trading Parabolic SAR indicator Trading Strategy Aroon Indicator Explained Bollinger bands strategy for Day Trading Forex Trading For Beginners ICT Trading Strategy Why I Ditched Other Currency Pairs and Only Trade Gold? Sell limit order vs. sell stop order Forex Market Sessions Cheat Sheet Buy limit order vs. Buy stop order 4 Types of Trading Styles How to calculate pips in USOIL (XTIUSD)? How to calculate Pips in Crypto? How to calculate pips in Gold? What is a pip? Types of Spread in Trading Types of Lot in Forex The Importance of Drawdown in Forex Trading Strategies Three Types of Drawdown in forex Margin Level and Stop out level in forex All types of forex currency pairs Margin, Account Balance, Equity, Floating P/L in forex Forex vs Stocks: Main differences Forex Trading Sessions All Types of Forex Orders What is forex Lot size? How do I position a forex trade? How to make money in forex What is forex trading? Top 8 Forex Day Trading Rules to follow Harmonic Patterns How to identify XABCD Pattern Correctly? Harmonic Patterns Cheat Sheet AB=CD Pattern Crab & Deep Crab Pattern Harmonic Gartley Pattern Harmonic Shark Pattern How to trade 5-0 Harmonic Pattern? Butterfly Pattern Forex Three Drives Pattern Cypher Pattern Harmonic Bat Pattern and SnD How to forex? How to do Part-Time Day Trading? Forex Compounding Plan for small trading account Top 4 traders to copy for COPY Trading What are Synthetic Indices How to Deposit money into MT4 Volatility 75 index What is volatility index? Scalping vs Day Trading Best Bearish Candlestick Patterns Bullish Candlestick Patterns Best Forex Trading Platform for mac/windows Best way to backtest trading strategies Learn Price Action Liquidity Sweeps Trading Strategy Explained Best Indicator for Scalping Trading in Gold (XAUUSD) Top 3 Gold Trend Reversal Patterns The most important Price Action pattern in trading? Inverse Fair Value Gap (iFVG) vs Fair Value Gap What is Displacement in Forex? Explained in Detail XAU/USD Set and Forget Strategy for Small Accounts Understanding Top Down Analysis in Trading Trend Lines Indicator by ForexBee Return to Order Blocks (RTO) Trading Strategy Explained How to trade using the Order Block Finder Indicator? I made XAUUSD Trading Strategy by using Supply Demand Zones How to trade SMT Divergence in ICT Trading? How to identify high probability Order Blocks in Trading? What is the Candlestick Range Theory in Forex Trading? What are Breaker Blocks in ICT Trading What is Buy Stops and Sell Stops Liquidity? Open Range Breakout (ORB) Trading Strategy How to identify Fair Value Gap? Top 9 Smart Money Concepts in Trading Supply and Demand Trendline Strategy S&P 500 Trading Strategy using 5th Wave Pattern What are Kill Zones in Forex? Break of Structure (BOS) in Trading Support and Resistance indicator with Candlestick Patterns [FREE ACCESS] GBPJPY Trading Strategy Explained What is Flag Limit in trading? How to trade Range using multi timeframes? Supply and Demand Trading Cheat Sheet How to Choose the Best Timeframe for Supply and Demand Trading Order Block vs Supply and Demand in Trading What is Change of Character in SMC Trading? Fair Value Gap in Cryptocurrency Difference between order block and fair value gap Range Trading Explained Understanding Price Rejection in trading What is FVG in Trading? How to find Order Blocks in Cryptocurrency? 5 Supply And Demand Trading rules Strong vs Weak Supply and Demand zones in Trading Swap Zone in Forex Trading How to identify Trend Strength in Trading? Impulsive wave explained in Trading SR Flip in forex: Definition & Trading Strategy What is Confluence in Forex Trading? Time and Supply Demand Zone: Case Study Results Bearish and Bullish order blocks Order Block Trading Strategy Crude Oil Trading Strategy What is the Swing Point in Trading? 4 Types of Supply and Demand Zones in Trading What are Order Blocks in forex What is QM Pattern in Trading? Support and Resistance Trading Strategy What is Drop Base Rally? What is Rally Base Drop in supply and demand? How to Trade Drop Base Drop Pattern in forex? What is Rally Base Rally in trading? inside bar trading strategies How to trade Quasimodo Pattern What is Volume Spread Analysis? How to use Fibonacci in forex trading? Fail to return forex and FTB forex True Meaning of Price Action Trading What is moving average in forex What is Quasimodo Pattern in forex What is Compression in forex How to read candlesticks? How to use Fibonacci with Supply and Demand Key Levels Forex Broadening Pattern in forex Trading FTR, Flag Limit, and Pole Pattern Support & Resistance and Supply & Demand What is Correlation in forex? A Currency Trader's Guide What is Supply and Demand in Forex Trading? What Does The Inside Bar Mean in Forex What are Higher highs and lower lows in Trading? How to identify strong support and resistance levels Pine Script Tutorial Best Pine Script Ai Tool for Traders How to Plot shapes and change colour in Pine Script Pine Script Tutorial - User input variable and hline() Pine Script Tutorial - Overlay and Plot function Pine Script Tutorial - Logical Operators Pine Script Tutorial - Comparison Operators Arithmetic Operators - Pine Script Tutorials Variable Forms in Pine Script Pine script variables and identifier Pine Script Basics | Study vs Strategy | Tutorial 2 Introduction to Pine Script Price Action Analysis Weekly NZDCAD Analysis using Demand Zone and Waves The Strat Timeframe Continuity in Strat Patterns Three Market Scenarios Explained What is Triangle They Out (TTO) Pattern in The Strat Introduction to the Strat Patterns Trading The Strat patterns: A Complete Guide Recommended Tool ⭐ Most Popular Supply &amp; Demand Indicator Auto-draw supply &amp; demand zones directly on your TradingView chart. No guesswork. Just clean, institutional-level zones. From $49/mo &nbsp; $99/mo Get Instant Access → &#128274; Secure · Cancel anytime · Instant setup XAUUSD analysis by TradingView Facebook X YouTube Pinterest Instagram Telegram LinkedIn Affiliate Program Advertising Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Risk Disclosure Refund Policy Contact Us About us &copy; 2026 ForexBee | All Rights Reserved Home Blog Learn Price Action Hot Price Patterns Forex Chart Patterns Candlestick Patterns Harmonic Patterns The Strat Forex Indicators Trading Forex Trading For Beginners Price Action Analysis Weekly How to forex? Pine Script Tutorial Supply &#038; Demand indicator Courses Calculators Backtesting Software New Forex Lotsize Calculator Forex Compounding Calculator VWAP Calculator Candlestick body to wick ratio calculator Candlestick Range Calculator Synthetic Indices Calculator Gann Square of 9 Calculator Bid Ask Spread Calculator Portal Manage Billing Close Search for: &#10005; FREE EBOOK Instant Download PDF &middot; Free forever Get Your Free Guide to Supply &amp; Demand Trading PDF &middot; Free Download Free Download &mdash; Limited Time Get Your Free Guide to Supply &amp; Demand Trading Join thousands of traders who mastered the most powerful strategy in forex. &#10003; Identify high-probability supply &amp; demand zones &#10003; Entry, stop-loss &amp; take-profit placement strategies &#10003; Real chart examples with step-by-step breakdowns GET FREE ACCESS &#8594; &#128274; No spam. Unsubscribe anytime.