What if you could see inside every
single candlestick? Not just the open,
high, low, and close, but exactly who's
winning the battle between buyers and
sellers at every level. That's what
volume footprint charts give you. And by
the end of this video, you will know how
to read it like a pro.
All right, guys. So, now it's finally
time to take a look at the volume
footprint. And this right here is one of
the most important tools we will cover
in this course. So, make sure to really
pay attention. Now, the volume footprint
is basically like having an X-ray on the
candlesticks. Uh before watching this
course, you might have only been
trading, you know, looking at
candlesticks. But what the volume
footprint allows us is to see what
actually goes on inside the candlesticks
themselves. And [clears throat] this
might looks you know super complicated
in the beginning but I will try to break
this down in super simple terms step by
step. So first of all the first thing we
need to learn is that we have a buy side
which is the green side and we have a
sell side which is the red side. And
what these sides basically tell us is
how much buying volume on the green side
and how much selling volume on the red
side happened at all of these specific
points uh inside the candle. So all of
these specific uh price points inside
the candle. So if we just look at a
random price level, let's for example
take a look at the one at the top. You
can see that it says zero on the buy
side. I hope you can see it says zero
right here. But on the sell side, it
says 32. That means that we saw 32 of
sell volume up here on the candle while
we saw zero buy volume. And now you
might think, you know, you might be
confused and think that, you know, for
every uh every time someone sells,
someone has to buy, right? And yes, you
are completely true. But what this
volume uh what what the numbers here
tell us is not the sort of total volume.
What this tell us is the market orders
because remember market orders is when
you take liquidity from the book. So in
this particular case we saw sellers you
know taking liquidity from the buy side.
This is what pushes the price down while
we saw no buyers taking liquidity from
the sell side. It's very important that
you notice that the buy volume is buy
market orders and the sell volume is
sell market orders. The volume footprint
tells us all about who is who is
controlling the price, who is pushing
the price up or down. And you do that
with market orders, not limit orders.
Remember, limit orders are placed in the
book. But now when you know this, you
now know that volume footprint is all
about who is pushing the price up or
down. Is it buyers or sellers? And now
there are a few important concepts you
need to learn. The first one is called
delta. And we already talked about
delta. That is basically the difference
between the buy side and sell side. So
for example, if we take a look at the
delta here at the lowest part, you see
right here, we have 14 on the sell side
and we have eight on the buy side. So
this right here is actually a negative
six in delta or in other words, we have
six sell volume in delta. But what you
can see down here, you can see that we
actually have a total delta. And that is
if we add up the deltas of all of these
blocks, we get the total amount of delta
during the whole candle. And in this
case, you can see that we had 1.4,000
bullish delta, which means that the
buyers were actually in control over
this candle. The next concept you need
to learn about is the point of control
or PC. And remember this was the level
where the most volume got traded. And in
trading view you can see super clearly
where the point of control is because
the point of control will be marked with
this black uh with this black bar right
here. So in this case the point of
control was right here. And the point of
control is very important because we can
use it for example for support and
resistance levels and it can give many
other hints as well. Now the next
concept we need to learn about is the
value area. And remember here the value
area is where around 70% of the volume
got traded. And in when you look at
volume footprints you will see two
markers. You can see it says value area
high right here or for short VA ah and
it says value area low here or for short
V.
and it is between these two lines. So
this area right here which is the value
area or for short VA as once again I can
repeat it that this was the area where
around 70% of volume got traded and it's
very common that the value area is often
you know relatively small compared to
the candle. You can see for example in
this case 70% of all volume within this
candle actually got traded on the upper
side and that can give give a signal
that this candle is maybe more bullish
than if 70% got traded down here. Okay.
So now it's time to take a look at
imbalances.
This right here is very important and
this is when one side, so either the
buying side or the selling side traded
at least three times as much as the
others side. So for example, the
imbalances you can see by this little
dot you have right there. You can see
you have a little dot right there. You
have a little dot right there. You have
a little dot on all of these three right
here as well. Uh but one thing you can
notice is that if you compare, you see
it says 304 here and here it says 118.
And you might think, you know, 118 18 *
3 is actually more than 304. So how is
this an imbalance? Well, the trick here
is that you actually need to compare it
diagonally. So you need to compare it
like this. You can see 3004 is more than
three times as large as 87. And that is
because the buy side will always be one
step above the cell side. This is a bit
hard to understand, but you will start
to see a pattern. You can see here we
have an imbalance because 141 is more
than three times larger than 21. Once
again, here we have another imbalance
because 45 is of course more than three
times as large as zero. Once again here
we have a diagonal imbalance because you
know uh 45 is more than three times as
large as uh 14. And the reason we don't
have an imbalance in the next one in the
next one we don't have an imbalance
because 104 is even larger than 88. You
always need to compare the imbalances
diagonally uh upwards when you do it
from uh the buy imbalances. But the sell
imbalances is the opposite. And here you
can notice the same with the cell
imbalances. Right here we have a cell
imbalance and right here we have a cell
imbalance. Why? Because 87 is more than
three times as large as zero and 543 is
more than three times as large compared
to
157.
So I hope this makes sense. And you
might wonder you know how can we use
this buy and sell imbalances? Well, I
will very soon show you a concept that
is known as absorption and init in
initiation. Uh, a little bit hard for me
to pronounce, but these concepts can be
super helpful in in understanding the
strength of each candle separately. But
before that, I want to take a look at
how we can use volume footprint as
support and resistance and in our
trading strategy.
All right. So now let's jump back into
trading view. Right here I am currently
looking at uh the daily time frame of
Bitcoin. But you can use volume
footprint charts in you know crypto. You
can also use it for stocks. You can also
use it for forex but it's a little bit
the data in forex is a little bit more
unclear. So volume footprint might work
a little bit better in stocks and crypto
but it does work in forex as well. Uh
and here as you can see I'm looking on
Bitcoin right now and just like as a
side note we saw a big big sell off in
crypto yesterday but one very you know
uh cool thing you will notice is that
Bitcoin actually bounced where we saw
something significant happening on the
volume footprint and I will show you
guys that very soon. But first let's of
course take a look at how do we open up
the volume footprint in Trading View.
Well, to do this, you want to go up here
to where it says candles. And then you
want to go down right here to where it
says volume footprint. And right now,
I'm not 100% sure if volume footprint is
available for free in Trading View. Uh
if you have a free account, please check
and let me know down in the comments.
But if it's not uh available, don't
worry because I do have a special link
to Trading View. You can use that link
to try out Trading View Premium
completely for free for 30 days. And if
you want to, if you like it enough, uh
I'm pretty sure you will, or at least I
do. Uh but then you will get a $15 bonus
if you want to continue on your trading
plan.
But to open the volume footprint, you
simply click right here. And just like
that, the uh candlesticks are
transformed into a volume footprint. And
now you already know how to read these
footprints. Or here, your footprints
might actually look a little bit
different to mine. And that is because I
do have another setting right now. So
what you want to do if your candlesticks
looks like this is that you go to the
settings tab. And right now you can see
that I have type delta. I think the
standard type is to show both the buy
and sell side. So let's choose buy and
sell right there. Uh and then press
okay. So your chart should look like
this. You should see uh you know both
the buy side and the sell side just as I
showed you recently. And when you zoom
in here you can clearly see you know how
aggressive was the sellers, how
aggressive was the buyers. You also have
the delta uh explained right there. So
was the sellers in control during the
candle or for example like right here
was the buyers in control. But now for
this trading strategy, I want to show
you one way you can use volume footprint
to find support and resistance. And this
is a very simple trading strategy, super
super easy. And what you want to look
out for here is that you want to look
out for clusters of point of control.
This is super easy to spot. For example,
right here on the chart, you can see
that we have multiple black bars
happening at the same time. And remember
that the black bars are the levels
within the candles where the most volume
got traded. And these levels where we
have lots and lots of volume traded can
often act act as magnets in the future.
So what we can actually do here is that
we can draw a support area. What I
usually like to use is go to geometric
shapes and use my rectangle. And then
you can see we can draw this support
area out right here. And you can see if
we drag the support area out, you can
actually see that this was exactly where
Bitcoin bounced before we saw this
beautiful move to the upside. And if we
even look at the candle that happened
just yesterday, you can see that we did
see a beautiful bounce at this area.
After you have done your analysis on the
volume footprint, it can often be
helpful to go back to the candlestick
charts and see how the price react. And
you can see that in this case, the price
beautifully bounced right here. We saw a
massive move towards the upside and the
price also bounced at this key support
just yesterday. And if you're looking
for a super simple trading strategy from
this support level, it could have looked
something like this. You use your long
position. So, you're looking to make
money from the price going up and then
you see the price coming down to the
support and you might enter at the first
strong uh reaction from the support
level. Setting your stop loss just below
the low right here. And with a
risk-to-reward ratio, your trade would
have looked something like this. And you
would have locked in some very nice
profit. But now you might ask yourself,
you know, is this, you know, analysis,
it seems super easy. It is is it enough
to only have sort of one bullish sign
which in this case is support and then
take your trade? Well, not really
because in order to make the trades more
likely to succeed, we preferably want to
combine it with other technical signals
as well. And this leads us to the next
thing we're going to talk about in this
video, which which is absorption and
init initiation. All
right, so now let's switch the
attention. All right, so this video was
actually just a very short clip from our
full order flow trading course right
here on YouTube. To watch the full
course, simply click or tap on the
screen right here. I hope I will see you
all over there very very