As we go through this, you'll decide
which footprint you like a little bit
better. It's just a different
perspective or a different angle in how
to look at the buying and selling
pressure that's occurring in the market.
So, there's really no right footprint to
use, but we're going to start off with
the volume footprint. And this is this
one is going to be very straightforward.
It's the most straightforward out of the
three. And this is going to show the
total volume traded at each price level
inside of a candle. So just looking at
this volume footprint right off of the
bat, you can see that we get the same
exact information like we would on a
regular candlestick, right? We have the
body of the candle like we normally
would. We have the top of the wick and
we have the bottom of the wick. Now we
have to ask ourselves what is volume,
right? Like over here buying and selling
is going to equate to all of the volume
in the market. So all of the aggressive
buy orders added or summed up with all
of the aggressive sell orders is going
to equal the volume. So we had 29 volume
here at this price point, 179 volume
here at this price point. We had 278
aggressive and aggressive buyers and
aggressive sellers at this price point.
And then you can see down here we had a
really high volume area. We had 1.2,000
volume and that's a little higher than
the rest of the surrounding volume
points. So this might be more of a
significant level that you might want to
pay attention to for your trading if
this is happening in your area of
interest. Right? This is going to be a
building block into the bid ask and into
the delta footprint as we move forward
here. Uh, pause the video if I'm going
too fast, but volume footprint is very
straightforward into the bid ask
footprint. This is the one that I like
to use the most. I use it about 80 to
90% of the time. Disregard all of the
noise, right? Like these highlighted
levels. This just gives us a visual of
the volume at each price. But you can
see on a bid ask spread, we have a left
column and we have a right column. The
left column is going to be known as our
bids. These are going to be all of our
aggressive sell orders at each price
level. Now, the right side, the right
column is going to be known as our ask,
otherwise known as the offer. You'll
hear uh you'll hear it referred to it as
a offer all the time. And this is going
to be our aggressive buy orders in the
market. Left column, aggressive sell
orders, right column, aggressive buy
orders in the market. Okay, so over here
we have 684 aggressive sell orders and
over here we have 887
aggressive buy orders down to the second
bullet point. This is just going to
allow us to see where the aggression is
stepping into the market. So over here,
for example, we can see we have a lot
more aggressive buy orders hitting the
market. But just remember, right, we
read these diagonal and over here you
can see we have 178 aggressive buy
orders to 56 sell orders, right? We have
about a 3 to1 imbalance. We have about
three times the amount of aggressive buy
orders than sell orders at this price
point. So, always read them diagonally.
And then again over here, you can see a
lot of volume hitting the offer. We have
an imbalance over here. Uh we have low
volume on the bid, right? Higher volume
on the offer. Again, we're having
tripledigit um volume on the offer and
we're having double digit volume on the
bid. Just letting us know there's a lot
of aggressive buy orders here that are
interested. Not only do we have a lot of
aggressive buy orders interested, but we
have a lack of aggressive sellers even
interested at those price points, too.
And that's going to even be meaningful
information to me. Stacked imbalances
should be used to validate your existing
idea, not to chase every sign of
momentum. I know when you look at this
right off the bat, it's like, yo, I
could just scalp every stacked
imbalanced move on the offer or every
stacked imbalanced move on the bid.
Remember, these should only be used to
validate your trade uh idea, not to
chase every sign of momentum. And what I
mean by that is, let's say we have a
breakout level right here. And let's say
you're looking to buy the breakout for
whatever reason, whatever your strategy
is, but let's say at this price point,
you were looking to buy the breakout. If
you see stacked imbalances start to
build or start to form on the offer,
that's going to give you more confidence
and conviction that your trade thesis is
going to be playing out, right? You
might not hesitate as much pulling the
trigger. you're you're recognizing that
other market participants are supporting
this idea or the market's intent is
supporting your existing trade thesis.
Right? Again, with footprint charts or
any type of order flow, our job is
really to try and gauge the market's
intent, right? What is the market trying
to do and how good of a job is the
market doing that? So, we can see over
here we got stacked imbalances on the
offer. The market is trying to push up
right now. In hindsight, how good of a
job is the market doing that? Well, it's
doing a pretty good job. Not only did we
push up, but even more aggressive buyers
stepped into the market letting us know
this is a very strong move that is
supported by a lot of aggressive
positive delta, right? A lot of
aggressive positive buyers stepping into
the market. So, main point here is use
it to validate your existing idea, not
to trace every sign of momentum. One
more point before we move on from the
bid ask footprint. We always also want
to use logic as we're given more
information in the mo in the market or
we always want to
um we always want to acknowledge
the new information as time passes.
Okay? Because I know at this price point
things look great. Now let's say we get
stacked imbalances on the offer and the
market starts to consolidate up here and
then let's say we end up failing and
start trading beneath this breakout
level. That's new information to us,
right? We know a ton of aggressive
buyers started to step into the market
at this price point. So if we were to
get something like this, what does that
now tell us? It lets us know we
potentially have a lot of trapped buyers
at this price point. Now that's new
information that we did not have before
we got this breakdown. So now these
stacked imbalances in this offer, we're
going to perceive that differently and
we're going to use that information
differently in terms of how we're
planning our execution in the market and
how we're planning about going about the
market. Right? So, um, that's how we can
apply some logic to our trades there.
Let's go ahead and go to the delta
footprint like we talked about before.
Same exact information like you're going
to get on a regular candlestick. We have
the body of the candle, top of the wick,
bottom of the bottom of the wick, but
now we have the delta at each price
point. Before we get into the delta, we
got to break down what even is delta.
Delta is going to be the difference
between aggressive buyers and sellers at
each price point. So, here we have a
positive 29, positive 49, positive 10.
We have 29 more aggressive buy orders
than aggressive sell orders at this
price point. So, it doesn't mean that we
didn't have aggre any aggressive sellers
here, right? It just lets us know we had
29 more. And then down here, we had a
negative 32 aggressive sellers. So, we
had a negative 32 delta. It doesn't mean
there wasn't any aggressive buyers
transacted at that level. It just lets
us know there were -32 more aggressive
sell orders than buy orders. And then
when we move down here, we can see we
have some strong delta. We have a -227
delta. This one stands out from the rest
of the surrounding delta. So, this is
going to be more significant information
to us, right? Let's say we were trading
a breakdown or we were trading a
breakout to the downside. Like we talked
about before, our job when we're reading
footprints is to try our best to gauge
the market intent. Question we always
want to ask ourselves is what is the
market trying to do and how good of a
job is the market doing that? That's
going to be the golden question whenever
trading order flow. If the market is
pushing down here, we're getting a lot
of aggressive sell orders stepping into
the market. How good of a job is the
market pushing down? Is the market
stalling here? Are we going to be
reversing on these orders or are we
getting followthrough? Because if we're
getting follow through, that's really
going to let us know the market is
really weak uh and the market's intent
is playing out, right? So, this is going
to help us gauge the aggression of the
buyers and sellers at each price level.
And it can also highlight hidden
pressure or absorption occurring at
different price levels or delta
divergence. Right? This is where delta
really is going to become most useful
for us with price points like this. Now,
you might ask, what is absorption?
Absorption is going to occur whenever
there is aggressive sell orders in the
market, but all of the passive buy
orders are absorbing those aggressive
sell orders. And whenever we get that in
the market, the market will typically
stall or reverse. And it goes back to
the golden question, what is the market
trying to do? And how good of a job is
the market doing whatever it's trying to
do? If we get a lot of aggressive sell
orders stepping into the market here,
but maybe price starts to go up, that is
an indication that we potentially have
absorption going on in the market
because how is it possible that we can
have more aggressive sell orders in the
market than aggressive buy orders, but
price is going up? Make that make sense.
How is that possible? The only
conclusion for that is the fact that
aggressive passive orders are absorbing
all of the aggressive volume to the
downside and that's how the market would
start to rise to the upside. So, we'll
get into absorption in another time. I
use the bid footprint because I can get
the volume information from the bid
footprint and I can get the information
from delta just by looking at the bid
footprint. And this is how I do that.
Let's look at this last price point on
all of these candles. All of these
candles are the same exact candle. It's
just on a different setting. So if we go
to volume, we have 309 volume transacted
at this last price level. Over here on
the bid ask, it's going to let us know
how much of that volume was transacted
on the bid and how much of that volume
was transacted on the ask. We know that
195 of that volume of the 309 was
aggressive sellers. And we know that 114
of that 309 was executed on the offer.
The sum of the bid and the ask is going
to give us the volume. So if I have the
bid ask footprint up, I know I can just
do some quick addition. If I add the bid
and the ask together, that's going to be
what the volume is for that price point.
So it makes more sense to me for me to
have the bid ask footprint on and not
the volume because I can get the volume
information by looking at the bid ask
footprint. If we look at delta, if we
look at this last price point, we have
81 delta. If we take the bid and the ask
and we subtract them from each other,
that's going to give us a delta at that
price point. So, if we have 195 and we
subtract 114 from the offer, that's
going to give us a 81. That's going to
let us know we had 81 more aggressive
sellers, right? More aggressive sellers
hitting the bid than hitting the offer,
which left us with 81. So, again, I'm
just making my case. This is the reason
as to why I like to use the bid ask
footprint because I can derive the
volume information and the delta
information by doing some really quick
math in my head. And then I also get to
use or have the luxury of using the bid
ask and being able to see these uh
imbalances on the bid or the offer while
using the bid ask footprint. Again,
sometimes I'll flicker through between
the volume and the delta footprint just
to get a quick snapshot of what it's
looking like, but usually I'll just have
it sitting on the bid ask footprint. If
you're new to orderflow and you want to
learn more, we're going to be going
through um all the basics of orderflow.
We're going to have an A through Z
library on the foundations of orderflow
footprint charts on this YouTube
channel. So, make sure you hit the
subscribe button if you want to learn
everything from the ground up.