Wyckoff Spring - New Trader U Skip to content New Trader U Empowering Your Financial Journey Home About Us Our Books New Trader U eCourses Privacy Policy Terms of Service Email Study at New Trader University Study at New Trader University New Trader U Empowering Your Financial Journey Home About Us Our Books New Trader U eCourses Privacy Policy Terms of Service Wyckoff Spring By Steve Burns Wyckoff Theory Wyckoff Method Richard Wyckoff was a famous trader, author, and technician from the 1920s. He founded the Wyckoff Stock Market Institute to study technicals and market price action. He developed a market model for a way of looking at the patterns that accumulation and distribution create on charts. Wyckoff Pattern A Wyckoff Spring is a signal he quantified that occurs when a chart falls below its support and makes a new panic low &nbsp;but then springs back into its previous trading range. It&rsquo;s a rare signal that usually occurs near market bottoms and usually happens during the last sell off on a chart. Wyckoff Springs show an imbalance in the supply/demand in a market. After making a new low, price rallies and then returns to the previous supply zone by returning to that area on a move back up. It&rsquo;s the loss of support and drop into an oversold level on a chart that finds new demand and bounces back over old support. In a Wyckoff Spring old support doesn&rsquo;t become new resistance, price breaks back into the old trading range. Price doesn&rsquo;t stay under the last swing lows because there&rsquo;s no supply from sellers to keep it down. The demand from buyers forces price action back up over the last swing low support. If there is no selling pressure at lower prices then demand will come in and the chart will rally. Wyckoff Springs can occur in any market and on any time frame. Considering higher time frame charts can help increase the odds of success by looking at the multiple time frame trends. Market context is important to consider when using this signal as it has a higher probability of success when it occurs near other confluences of technical signals like oversold levels, key moving averages, or historical previous long term support on the chart. Wyckoff Accumulation Chart courtesy of StockCharts.com &larr; Previous Post Next Post &rarr; Related Posts This is What a Down Trend Looks Like Chart Reading , Trend Following / By Steve Burns 10 Things Traders Can Do Instead of Losing Money Chart Reading , Risk Management , Stress , Trading Method , Trading Plan , Trading Psychology , Trading System , Trend Following , Volatility / By Steve Burns Search Search Terms of Service The information provided through the Website and our services is intended for educational and informational purposes only and not recommendations to buy or sell a specific security .​ Read More&#8230; 5 Habits of Mentally Strong People, According to Charlie Munger 7 Terrible Things The Middle Class Wastes Money On According To Warren Buffett 10 Upper-Class Lessons That Working-Class People Learn Too Late in Life Compound Interest Explained By Warren Buffett: Why It Is The Secret Ingredient To Becoming Rich 5 Choices That Will Change Your Life, According to Charlie Munger Copyright &copy; 2026 New Trader U | Stolly Media, LLC &nbsp; &nbsp;